+++
date = '2026-03-19T20:57:01-04:00'
draft = false
title = 'The Importance of Notes (RE1)'
+++
Taking notes is an important part of research, particularly in light of Kate Turabian and Zachary M. Schrag’s view that a major part of research is sharing your findings with others. Taking notes then becomes a necessary goal if you are planning on writing a paper, giving a discussion at a conference, or even just participating in a classroom discussion.

In Chapter 12 of Schrag’s The Princeton Guide to Historical Research (Skills for Scholars), he notes that paper has some advantages over the internet, since paper will not crash or does not require internet connectivity to use (as I’m typing this, my internet went out). He notes that handwriting notes can cause you to really think about the information you are taking notes on, and in a rigorous graduate program where you may be reading multiple books a week, writing notes by hand can help you evaluate if that tidbit of information you thought you so desperately needed is even worth it at all. I have nearly always taken notes on readings by hand, using sticky notes to mark major points of interest in a book.
The image above shows a snippet of the system at work when annotating Nell Irvin Painter’s Southern History Across the Color Line. Note that the reason I placed the sticky note in the book in the first place (to mark where the author began expressing her argument for the book) is clearly written far enough out to where I can see it even if I close the book. When opening the book, I have highlighted the author’s argument so my eyes immediately go there instead of scanning the whole page again. Colors in my system have no real meaning.

For the purposes of this exercise, I did take some notes electronically. In the photo below, you can see that I included the main arguments of the author, the significance of her work to the broader research community, and slightly more notes than I would usually use on a sticky note. I also included major quotes with page numbers, which Schrag insists upon. However, I admit that the likelihood of this file being opened again is quite low, and I fear that I would lose the file into the depths of my computer. I plan to experiment further to see if this would be a profitable long-term strategy for me, since I would like to be able to access my notes remotely at any time.
My goal for the semester is to really research different note taking software that could help me sort the notes I have taken. While I love my sticky notes, I readily admit that they are not easily sorted when it comes time to write. I think that database software such as the kind Schrag describes can be particularly helpful, since they have the ability to sort, filter, and date-stamp references. I believe finding a way to easily sort the notes I have will help me tremendously as I acquire more sources on the road to my dissertation and beyond.